Edits (#52)
osu-tournament-rating/otr-docs: docs/topics/Sample-Match.md

# Sample Match

This page is dedicated to carrying out calculations to demonstrate an example of rating changes from a single match. We will be following the logic described [[Rating-Calculation.md#Ranking & rating calculation|here]], so it is advised to read that page first. This page will focus on detailing the actual calculations used in the [paper](https://jmlr.csail.mit.edu/papers/volume12/weng11a/weng11a.pdf) which introduces this rating model. 

> [!note]
> It is not necessary to understand every calculation on this page to get a good sense of what the rating model is doing. This documentation exists primarily for those who are curious about the mathematics, and also so that the rating assignment process is more transparent than only specifying "the ratings are fed into a model and numbers come out of it."
> 
> If you are interested more in the general philosophy of what ratings represent, it is highly recommended to read [[Rating-Calculation.md#Ranking & rating calculation|this page]] instead.

> The sample match we will be using is [LC: (H O L A) vs (Ummm)](https://otr.stagec.xyz/matches/33746) ([osu!](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/matches/112506508)). It was chosen for its relatively short length and smaller format—2v2, team size 3—while still effectively illustrating the main ideas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample match we will be using is [LC: (H O L A) vs (Ummm)](https://otr.stagec.xyz/matches/33746) ([osu! link](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/matches/112506508)). It was chosen for its relatively short length and smaller format—2v2, team size 3—while still effectively illustrating the main ideas.
```

| $5$  |  parr0t  | Railgun\_ |  Isita   | Zeer0 |
| $6$  |  Isita   |  parr0t  | Railgun\_ | Zeer0 |

These rankings are the only information taken into account for rating calculations (individual scores are not considered). For each game, the players who play in it will be given a "game rating change." All games are calculated in the same way, so we will demonstrate this process for the first game.

Here, we follow the notation and logic of Algorithm 4 of the paper, found on page 21 of [the paper](https://jmlr.csail.mit.edu/papers/volume12/weng11a/weng11a.pdf). The description also references Algorithm 1, which can be found on page 15.

First, we compute an overall uncertainty constant which the paper calls $c$, which is given by 
$$c = \sqrt{4\beta^2 + \sigma_{\text{Railgun\_}}^2 + \sigma_{\text{parr0t}}^2 + \sigma_{\text{Isita}}^2 + \sigma_{\text{Skyy}}^2} \approx 614.2.$$

> Here $\beta = 150$ is a constant specified by our [constants file](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-processor/blob/master/src/model/constants.rs), and the other four terms in the square roots come from the rating deviations of the four players (before the match). This $c$ is used to compute the predicted probabilities of players placing in various orders. It roughly means that for this game a difference of $c \approx 614.25$ rating points between two players means the higher-rated player has $e \approx 2.7$ times the chance of placing above the lower-rated player.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here $\beta = 150$ is a constant specified by our [constants file](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-processor/blob/master/src/model/constants.rs), and the other four terms in the square roots come from the rating deviations of the four players (before the match). This $c$ is used to compute the predicted probabilities of players placing in various orders. It roughly means that for this game, a difference of $c \approx 614.25$ rating points between two players means the higher-rated player has $e \approx 2.7$ times the chance of placing above the lower-rated player.
```

> Next, we calculate, in the notation of the paper, two values $\Omega$ and $\Delta$ for each player in the game. These specify an *additive* rating change and a *multiplicative* rating deviation change respectively. Instead of repeating all of the formulas from the paper, we will try to work out examples in understandable words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we calculate, in the notation of the paper, two values $\Omega$ and $\Delta$ for each player in the game. These specify an *additive* rating change and a *multiplicative* rating deviation change, respectively. Instead of repeating all of the formulas from the paper, we will try to work out examples in understandable words.
```

   and with the same formulas as poisonvx we find
   $$\Omega_{\text{Zeer0}} \approx \boxed{-126.2}, \quad \Delta_{\text{Zeer0}} \approx \boxed{0.023}.$$

> Here is the table of $\Omega_i$ and $\Delta_i$ values under Method B. Note that we no longer have a column for $c$ because it is the same across all games in this Method (all six players are considered in all games).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the table of $\Omega_i$ and $\Delta_i$ values under Method B. Note that we no longer have a column for $c$ because it is the same across all games in this method (all six players are considered in all games).
```

| [Railgun\_](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/13817114) | $1000 \to 1053.4$ |       $280 \to 277.4$       |
| [poisonvx](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/9391047)  |  $700 \to 697.3$  |       $270 \to 269.3$       |
|   [Skyy](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7113149)    |  $600 \to 566.1$  |       $270 \to 268.5$       |

> All players' rating deviations have slightly decreased, indicating that the model is slightly more confident about the updated ratings. For example, Railgun\_'s rating has significantly increased due to their high participation and relatively high placement among players throughout the match. The overall rating changes are not precisely zero-sum due to the differences in players' rating deviations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All players' rating deviations have slightly decreased, indicating that the model is slightly more confident about the updated ratings. Also notice that Railgun\_'s rating has significantly increased due to their high participation and relatively high placement among players throughout the match. The overall rating changes are not precisely zero-sum due to the differences in players' rating deviations.
```
